Introduction
Accelerators are important drivers for fundamental research, especially at the energy and power frontier.
Electromagnetic fields are best suited for accelerating and controlling particles.
Linear accelerators are simple but uneconomical for high energy.
Circular accelerators require a periodic solution, linearized solution in transverse space is easily understood.
Real accelerators have stochastic, nonlinear, and collective effects, and the linear solution is broken.
Already found the linear solution, we need to look for a nonlinear solution.
Integrable Hamiltonian systems offer good predictive power of the dynamics.
Hamiltonian systems satisfying the Nekhoroshev condition are desirable.
Want a system which can be satisfied with magnetic fields, easy to build.
Enter Danilov and Nagaitsev, start with Courant-Snyder linear system, implies construction as an insert.
End up with linear component plus nonlinear function, long studied problem, see Hietarinta.
The above constraints yield a number of solutions, in elliptic, parabolic, and polar coordinates.
We investigate the elliptic solution since the origin is a stable fixed point, unlike polar.
Parabolic solution has trajectories which cannot circle the origin, leads to unusual density characteristics.
Elliptic solution has distinct spirograph patterns, a discerning NIO scholar will have their favorites.
Prefer Chad's alternative complex parameterization of the system, easier for kick and field expansion.
Simulations of the basic system show large flexibility in selection of poles and large tune spread.
Above solutions ignore longitudinal dynamics, especially chromaticity.
Practically the required potential must be pricewise approximated with imperfect magnets.
Enter IOTA, machine constructed to evaluate the practicality of such a system.
Presented work considers simulations and electron experiments on the DN NIO system.
Supplemental work involving the magnetic field mapping and proton line simulation and characterization are also considered.

Experimental Facility/Design
The IOTA ring is constructed to study nonlinear integrable particle optics.
IOTA is a 40 m circumference storage ring with 4 30 degree dipoles and 4 60 degree dipoles.
Overall configuration is heavily influenced by VEPP-2000 accelerator design.
Dipoles have dedicated trim coils and "flux compensator" elements to alleviate sagitta issues with closed orbit.
Primary focusing is from 39 quadrupoles of two types, "Dubna" and "Radiabeam".
All quads are powered with Sorensen supplies, some (High Beta?) have Bira regulators with DCCT.
Local correction is provided for by 20 Panofsky type skew correctors with H,V dipoles and skew quad correction.
There is one unique vertical corrector intended for an injection bump.
The injection septum is a Lambertson type magnet.
Bunching is provided for by a ferrite loaded quarter wave cavity operating at "" Hz
There are 12 sextupoles for chromatic compensation and harmonic tuning, 4 "Fermilab" 2 "short" and 6 "long".
The ring has 3 dedicated straights for experimental inserts.
In run 4 they are occupied by a string of octupoles, a string of DN magnets, and an undulator.
The undulator is permanent magnets, was for a synchrotron radiation experiment unrelated to NIO studies.
The octupoles are all symmetric small 4A designs, for evaluating the quasi-integrable Hamiltonian.
Octupoles were driven by 5A bipolar BIRA supplies with good noise characteristics. - true?
Octupoles fiducialized to their base, and arranged for an equi-phase approach.
NIO magnets must be designed to match the unique elliptical potential of th DN system.
Pole faces are placed to sit at a constant potential surface in DN normalized coordinates.
For IOTA NIO c=0.0009, and the potential value selected for the surface is 0.5.
Mirror symmetric magnets needed to be individually EDM'd to match longitudinal scaling.
Vacuum chamber design was very carefully done, but issues were all ironed out when I arrived.
NIO magnet driven by bipolar 2A supplies.
IOTA diagnostics used were BPMs, synchrotron cameras, and direct current current transformer (DCCT).
IOTA bpms are capacitive "button" style, with 20 of one geometry and one different large aperture BPM.
BPMS have a sample rate of 32 points per turn, digitizer aligns BPMS to location in turn.
Linear fit is applied to raw signal difference over sum for the first 16 sample points for position.
An order 7 coupled polynomial is applied based on bpm calibration with stretched wire. 
BPMs can be triggered in TBT or closed orbit mode.
TBT samples 7000 turns of individual TBT signals.
Closed orbit averages over 1000 turns for more accurate circulating measurements. - correct?
IOTA can operate with protons for intense space charge and investigation of collective effects.
Most of the studies in this thesis were focused on electrons.

Single Particle Simulations - improve story based flow
To evaluate stability and implementation of various nonlinear integrable optics schemes single particle simulations were carried out.
The first verification is reasonable conservation of the analytically predicted invariants.
The simulation is constructed as a series of thin kicks proportional to the nonlinear potential followed by the necessary thin lens.
The variance of the evaluated invariants from tracked coordinates can be compared.
Different compositions of the nonlinear insert were considered.
Equi-phase advance in the thin kicks showed improvements in conservation for a given number of elements.
Equivalent thick lenses showed small reductions in conservation. - consider equi-phase centering
Further extended single particle models to include full IOTA lattice.
Evaluate tune spread and impacts of nonlinearities in matching section of the lattice.
Consider 6-D effects including chromatic effects in nonlinear lenses.
Three basic forms of the IOTA lattice, fully linear, with first order chromaticity including compensation, and with kinematic nonlinearities and exact dipole mappings.
See significant effects on bare lattice chromaticity from the exact dipole mappings.

Multi Particle simulations
Bunch simulations with chromaticity and kicked beam decoherence.

Proton Line Efforts
Simulation of RFQ and MEBT with space charge.

150 MeV Electron Experiment
Electron experiment consisted of three major thrusts, lattice commissioning and alignment including nonlinear elements, kicked beam turn by turn measurements, and circulating beam measurements with synchrotron radiation monitors.
Lattice commissioning involved LOCO fitting of the lattice to the nominal NIO lattice, some linear element alignment.
Chromatic compensation using orthogonal sextupole knobs indicated misalignment.
Sextupole misalignment adjusted for final dynamic aperture optimization on losses using chromatic null space.
Turn by turn data performed in dynamic aperture scans and dense grids.

Measured dynamic aperture with different sextupole configurations.
Simple center of the logistic function on the beam current was applied as the figure of merit for optimization algorithm.

DN insert was aligned using LOCO methods assuming only the quadrupole term of the magnet.
Relative calibration of the individual elements was done by measuring small amplitude tune response of individual magnets, comparing to quadrupolar effect.

150 MeV Electron Analysis
The primary goals of electron experiments with nonlinear integrable optics are direct measurements of impacts of the nonlinear insert on the dynamics and evaluating the stability of the system. 

Decoherence times with different sextupole configurations? Include operational maximum coherent oscillation with sextupole tuning, Elog ID 237210.

Tune measurements are the most accurate diagnostic available from the turn by turn data as it is independent of the signal amplitude.
Tune verses amplitude is a direct measurement of the available tune spread and therefore strength of landau damping.
The definition of tune is a little nebulous for nonlinear systems, but we will just evaluate it as the dominant frequency.
Different tune measurement algorithms were considered.
The simplest approach is to take a Fourier transform of the TBT data and pick the peak frequency.
In practice this is done with a fast Fourier transform as we have a discrete sampling.
Padding the signals with zeros improves the granularity of the FFT, but may add some artifacts.
To bypass some of the resolution limitations of the FFT, the Jacobsen interpolation algorithm is sometimes used.
Practically, for best tune measurements in accelerator physics the numerical analysis of fundamental frequencies (NAFF) is the standard.
NAFF looks to iteratively maximize individual Fourier transform components.
The online tune analysis tool uses a similar approach but directly fits a convolution of harmonic components and an exponential decoherence envelope.
These methods were compared for a variety of sample signals, a generated clean signal, also with a decoherence envelope and noise, a simulated centroid signal, and real signals with different preprocessing levels.
Naff showed consistently better convergence, especially with padding on signals with decoherence envelopes.
Multipole BPM signals are available and we would like to combine them, there are two approaches considered.
The first is a bpm stacking approach, where a quasi-periodic signal with jumbled overlapped phases is constructed, but this ignores coupling with strong orthogonal kicks which might override the other signal.
An alternative approach was to select PCA components for all combined BPM signals, as we are interested in the frequency components the amplitude calibration is irrelevant - so long as nonlinear BPM responses are small.
Starting tune measurements from different initial turns had an impact on the measurement, this was included in the uncertainty estimation.
The effect is most prominent for very short sample windows.
Another effect on tune measurements is resonant capture, where a small fraction of the beam dominates long term tune measurements.
This can be seen in the spectrogram with short vertical decoherence with a long faint line.
Resonant capture was additionally demonstrated on similar lines as seen in experiment in simulation with realistic bunches.

To evaluate the full phase space, momentum reconstruction from the tbt BPM data is necessary.
There are two main experimental reasons to extract info, amplitude calibration and nonlinear motion quantification.
Started with 2-bpm, but it ignores a lot of signal.
3 and N bpm methods use phase measurements as the baseline, don't trust linear phase measurements for nonlinear system.
Decided on least squares fit to LOCO matrix results, easy to interpret.
We have a good idea of the linear lattice transfer matrices from LOCO.
Use transfer matrices as the model, tbt position in BPMS as data, and position and momentum at a single point as the free parameters.
Tbt data consists of ~7000 turns sampled in each BPM, a turn defined as starting at the Lambertson septum.
The nonlinear insert is excluded from fitting, so turn by turn data is considered from end of insert to beginning.
The tbt data must be "slipped" to consider the causality of the later bpms.
There are of course nonlinearities in the fit channel, but they are proportionally small and incoherent over one turn.
Individual BPMS can be dropped to account for acquisition failures, in practice not done automatically.
Lmfit python package was used for easy access to error and goodness of fit metrics. 
In typical kicked data sets, the beam has long since decohered and so the tail is mostly tbt BPM noise.
The beam is still large as the damping time is much longer, but centroid is noise.
To provide the least squares residual error, the standard deviation in the last 2000 turns of the sample was evaluated.
Outliers disproportionally impact std, so inter quartile range with gaussian normalization was used as uncertainty.
Reduced chi square per turn was used as goodness of fit evaluator.
Initially goodness of fit showed an unusually large variation.
Discriminating on data using magnitude of tbt uncertainty resulted in reasonable chi squared distributions.
The effect of a number of preprocessing techniques on goodness of fit was evaluated.
The big considerations were PCA cleaning, BPM calibration, and dropping BPMs.
PCA is a special case of singular value decomposition where the variance for each iterative singular value is maximized.
SVD was initially considered, but PCA should separate dominant modes better.
PCA implementation in scikit-learn is also very fast compared to generic numpy SVD.
PCA is applied to tbt data from all bpms in both planes to account for coupling effects.
High order PCA terms are assumed to be uncorrelated noise and excluded.
Typically, the first 8 PCA terms were retained, sometimes more to ensure no information was removed.
The PCA decomposition is then returned to the original BPM tbt space and fitting is applied.
PCA cleaning demonstrated a significant benefit in the relative reduced chi square goodness of fit metric.
The BPM calibration was based on the LOCO results, BPM rotation and scaling allowed to adjust to best fit model.
End effect of BPM calibrations is beam based individual bpm calibrations.
BPM calibration showed proportional improvement with PCA, dominated by the oddball BPM.
Similar scale improvements in relative reduced chi squared for simply dropping that BPM.
Dropping other BPMS showed no significant improvement in goodness of fit to linear model.
Fits were performed with uncoupled 4x4 matrices since local coupling was minimized in LOCO.

In addition to momentum reconstruction for phase space analysis, the reconstruction was used for amplitude calibration of kicker strengths.
We want to verify from experiment what the resulting amplitude from the kickers will be, especially when sensitivity may be small.
Interpretation after passing through the nonlinear insert is nebulous, prefer to calibrate amplitude to setting.
Use bare lattice kicks to calibrate measured first turn amplitudes vs kicker settings.
First, recognized discrepancies in state of lattice tune on kick ratios, presumably due to shifts in beta function at kicker.
Additional recognition of quadratic dependence of horizontal kicks at large amplitudes, perhaps from beam scraping.
Apply fits with coupling, fit results support slight roll of vertical kicker.


Dynamic aperture measurements measured beam intensity for repeated kicks along a particular kicker setting ratio.
Two intensity measurements were available, DCCT and BPM sum signal, sampled before and after the kick.
Both were used consistently in tandem to select edge for dynamic aperture evaluation.
Sum signals quickly lose sensitivity with lower current but provide good relative intensity.
DCCT measurements are well calibrated and 

The synchrotron camera images were used for evaluation of beam stability at the integer resonance condition.
The calibrated t strength was used while observing the beam as the integer resonance was crossed.
The camera exposure had to be changed during the course of the measurements, as continuing beam loss reduced the signal.
At each t-value, a number of images were collected to measure relative intensity.
Two runs were performed, one with the nominal lattice and one adjusted to best center the profile in the nonlinear potential.
The images were preprocessed with a media filter to remove potential hot pixels, and a background subtraction was applied.
The lifetime at a given t-value can then be estimated with a fit of exponential decay.
Past the integer resonance condition the central stable fixed point becomes unstable, and two new stable fixed points move away from the origin with t-strength.
We can define an upper limit on the integer resonance crossing when these fixed points split and we see separate maxima in the beam.
Lifetime measurements indicate asymptotic stability of particles at the integer resonance where the nonlinear focusing terms dominate.


Magnet Measurements
To prepare for the IOTA electron run, the octupole magnets were evaluated for alignment.
A three axis magnetic test stand was used to sample the field at predefined points.
Before the measurements, the test stand needed to be aligned to acceptable tolerances.
The scan was performed on a cylinder in the magnet.
The harmonic decomposition of the magnetic field on the circles was used to align wrt. fiducials.
Based on experience with operations on the Octupoles, the magnetic test stand software was improved.
A python class for faster head movement and superior data type output was developed.
During IOTA operation, harmonic sextupole alignment became suspicious.
Simple observations of closed orbit with sextupole excitation indicated offsets or field errors.
Measurements of closed orbit offsets using bumps in sextupoles indicated fundamental dipole offset.
A sextupole was evaluated using the test stand afterward.
Dipole error was demonstrated to be independent of hysteresis.
Harmonic evaluation wrt. current suggested fundamental multipole error.
Coil turns not suspected, suggested to be uncontrolled differences in relative permeability of poles.
Next generation nonlinear insert to be magnetically evaluated using test stand.
